---
name: Online Werewolf Basics
menu: General
route: /
---

# How to Play Werewolf Online

werewolv.es has two basic game modes. 24 hour games and speed rounds.
The 24 hour games have 12-hour day and night cycles. In speed rounds a
day and night only take a few minutes. The 24 hour games are played
continuously - there is usually one ongoing, and one where you can sign
up, at any moment. The speed games are occasionally hosted in the
weekend. Whichever mode is used, victory conditions and basic play
remains the same: The village is trying to work out who are killing them
during the night, and the evil factions are trying to stay hidden until
they have whittled down the numbers of the village. The evil factions
are: the Werewolves, the Coven, and the Vampire - each game includes at
least one, and possibly multiple, of these factions. The game is divided
into two basic phases, day and night.

## Night Phase

During the night phase, members of evil factions can talk to their
allies in secret and choose their victim(s). This is the time that
special characters can decide how to use their unique ability. When
night is over, abilities and kills are resolved and day begins.

## Day Phase

The daytime is where most of the game of werewolv.es actually takes
place. The village must talk amongst itself and piece together whatever
scraps of information they may have been able to find in order to work
out who the enemies are. Once the village has a suspicion, they are able
to democratically lynch someone. Once they have lynched all evils, they
win.

## Lynching

Votes are cast throughout the day and when night falls, the player with
the most votes is lynched by the village. If there is a tie, nobody is
lynched.

## Order of night actions

The different abilities roles have at night may influence each other.
How they do is determined by the order in which the night actions are
defined to take place. The order of night actions is:

  - Redirects (Succubus)
  - Roleblocks (Direwolf)
  - Protection visits (Protector, Huntsman, Shaman)
  - Most visits (Too many to list: all visits not belonging in another
    category)
  - Active Item visits (Crossbows, potions etc)
  - Item Transfers
  - Resolve kills (Killing werewolf (Werewolf/Alphawolf/Shapeshifter),
    Vampire, Witch, Militia)
  - Report visits to Stalkers, Harlots, Familiar
  - Resolve item thefts (from abilities, potions and kills)
  - Swap Identities (Djinn, Shapeshifter)
  - Report kills to village
  - Report revives to village

Some general points: nightly abilities will still take place even if the
role is killed that night, as the majority of abilities and actions
happen simultaneously. This also holds for all identity-swapping
abilities (Djinn, Shapeshifter) just as for other abilities. The
important point to note here is that, by the time the identities of
players are swapped, the game has already determined who is going to be
killed that night. Thus identity-swapping abilities can never change
which *player* will die in the night, but they can change which
*character* will be reported dead at dawn. For example: if a
Shapeshifter is targeted by some killing ability, they cannot escape
their fate by shifting into some other character that night.

Note that all roles get reports on the situation before
identity-swapping abilities, meaning that your information is possibly
outdated by the time you receive it.
